ἙΡΜΟΥ ΤΡΙΣΜΕΓΙΣΤΟΥ ΠΟΙΜΑΝΔΡΗΣ
Poimandres of Hermes Trismegistus

Ἐννοίας μοί ποτε γενομένης περὶ τῶν ὄντων καὶ
Once, when a thought had arisen in me concerning the beings / things-that-are, and

μετεωρισθείσης μοι τῆς διανοίας σφόδρα, 
the reasoning faculty being intensely lifted out of itself, 

κατασχεθεισῶν μου τῶν σωματικῶν αἰσθήσεων, καθάπερ οἱ ὕπνῳ βεβαρημένοι
my bodily senses having been checked / held fast, exactly as those weighed down by sleep

ἐκ κόρου τροφῆς ἢ ἐκ κόπου σώματος, ἔδοξά τινα
from fullness of food or from bodily fatigue, I seemed (to myself) to perceive someone

1.5

ὑπερμεγέθη μέτρῳ ἀπεριορίστῳ τυγχάνοντα καλεῖν 
immeasurably vast, being without limit, calling

μου τὸ ὄνομα καὶ λέγοντά μοι, Τί βούλει ἀκοῦσαι καὶ θεάσασθαι,
my name and saying to me: “What do you wish to hear and to behold,

καὶ νοήσας μαθεῖν καὶ γνῶναι;
and, having understood, to learn and to know?”

2.1

— φημὶ ἐγώ, Σὺ γὰρ τίς εἶ;
And I said, “Then who are you?”

— Ἐγὼ μέν, φησίν, εἰμὶ ὁ Ποιμάνδρης,
“I,” he says, “am Poimandres,

ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς·
the Nous of authority (the sovereign / originating Mind).

οἶδα ὃ βούλει,
I know what you wish,

καὶ σύνειμί σοι πανταχοῦ.
and I am with you everywhere.”

3.1

— φημὶ ἐγώ, Μαθεῖν θέλω τὰ ὄντα
And I said, “I wish to learn the beings / the things-that-are,

καὶ νοῆσαι τὴν τούτων φύσιν
and to understand their nature,

καὶ γνῶναι τὸν θεόν·
and to know God.

πῶς, ἔφην, ἀκοῦσαι βούλομαι.
How, I said, I desire to hear.”

— φησὶν ἐμοὶ πάλιν, Ἔχε νῷ σῷ
And he said to me again, “Hold in your mind

ὅσα θέλεις μαθεῖν,
whatever things you wish to learn,

κἀγώ σε διδάξω.
and I will teach you.”

4.1

τοῦτο εἰπὼν ἠλλάγη τῇ ἰδέᾳ,
Having said this, he changed in appearance,

καὶ εὐθέως πάντα μοι ἤνοικτο ῥοπῇ,
and immediately everything was opened to me in a single sweep,

καὶ ὁρῶ θέαν ἀόριστον,
and I behold an indefinite / boundless vision:

φῶς δὲ πάντα γεγενημένα,
all things having come to be as light,

εὔδιόν τε καὶ ἱλαρόν,
clear and serene,

καὶ ἠράσθην ἰδών.
and I fell in love upon seeing.

καὶ μετ’ ὀλίγον σκότος κατωφερὲς ἦν,
And after a little while there was a downward-tending darkness,

ἐν μέρει γεγενημένον,
having come to be in part,

4.5

φοβερόν τε καὶ στυγνόν,
terrifying and grim,

σκολιῶς ἐσπειραμένον,
twisted in a crooked spiral (coils),

ὡς <ὄφει> εἰκάσαι με·
so that I could liken it to a serpent.

εἶτα μεταβαλλόμενον τὸ σκότος εἰς ὑγρᾶν
Then the darkness changed into a moist

τινα φύσιν,
kind of nature,

ἀφάτως τεταραγμένην
unspeakably disturbed,

καὶ καπνὸν ἀποδιδοῦσαν, ὡς ἀπὸ πυρός,
and giving off smoke, as if from fire,

καί τινα ἦχον ἀποτελοῦσαν
and producing a certain sound,

ἀνεκλάλητον γοώδη·
indescribable, lament-like.

εἶτα βοὴ ἐξ αὐτῆς ἀσυνάρθρως
Then a cry was sent forth from it, incoherently,

4.10

ἐξεπέμπετο, ὡς εἰκάσαι φωνῇ πυρός,
so that it could be likened to the voice of fire.

5.1

ἐκ δὲ φωτὸς ….. λόγος
And from the Light … a Logos

ἅγιος ἐπέβη τῇ φύσει,
holy descended upon Nature,

καὶ πῦρ ἄκρατον ἐξεπήδησεν
and unmixed fire leapt forth

ἐκ τῆς ὑγρᾶς φύσεως
from the moist nature

ἄνω εἰς ὕψος·
upward into the height.

κοῦφον δὲ ἦν καὶ ὀξύ,
And it was light and sharp,

δραστικὸν δὲ ἅμα,
and at the same time active;

καὶ ὁ ἀὴρ ἐλαφρὸς ὢν
and the air, being light,

ἠκολούθησε τῷ πνεύματι,
followed the spirit,

5.5

ἀναβαίνοντος αὐτοῦ
as it ascended

μέχρι τοῦ πυρὸς
up to the fire,

ἀπὸ γῆς καὶ ὕδατος,
away from earth and water,

ὡς δοκεῖν κρέμασθαι
so that it seemed to hang

αὐτὸν ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ·
from it.

γῆ δὲ καὶ ὕδωρ
But earth and water

ἔμενε καθ’ ἑαυτὰ συμμεμιγμένα,
remained by themselves mingled together,

ὡς μὴ θεωρεῖσθαι
so that they were not distinguishable

<τὴν γῆν> ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕδατος·
the earth from the water;

κινούμενα δὲ ἦν
yet they were in motion

διὰ τὸν ἐπιφερόμενον
because of the impinging

πνευματικὸν λόγον
spiritual Logos

εἰς ἀκοήν.
that came into hearing.

6.1

ὁ δὲ Ποιμάνδρης ἐμοί, Ἐνόησας, φησί, τὴν θέαν ταύτην ὅ τι καὶ βούλεται;
And Poimandres said to me, “Have you understood this vision—what it intends?”

καὶ, Γνώσομαι, ἔφην ἐγώ.
And I said, “I shall come to know.”

– Τὸ φῶς ἐκεῖνο, ἔφη, ἐγὼ Νοῦς ὁ σὸς θεός,
“That light,” he said, “am I—Nous, your God,

ὁ πρὸ φύσεως ὑγρᾶς τῆς ἐκ σκότους φανείσης·
who existed before the moist nature that appeared out of darkness;

ὁ δὲ ἐκ Νοὸς φωτεινὸς Λόγος υἱὸς θεοῦ.
and the luminous Logos that comes forth from Nous is the Son of God.”

6.5

– Τί οὖν; φημί.
“What then?” I said.

– Οὕτω γνῶθι·
“Know it thus:

τὸ ἐν σοὶ βλέπον καὶ ἀκοῦον, λόγος κυρίου,
that which sees and hears within you is the Logos of the Lord,

ὁ δὲ νοῦς πατὴρ θεός.
and Nous is Father God.

οὐ γὰρ διίστανται ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων·
For they are not separated from one another;

ἕνωσις γὰρ τούτων ἐστὶν ἡ ζωή.
for the union of these is life.”

— Εὐχαριστῶ σοι, ἔφην ἔγω.
“I thank you,” I said.

— Ἀλλὰ δὴ νόει τὸ φῶς καὶ γνώριζε τοῦτο.
“But now understand the light and recognize this.”

7.1

εἰπόντος ταῦτα ἐπὶ πλείονα χρόνον ἀντώπησέ μοι,
When he had said these things, for a longer time he gazed upon me,

ὥστε με τρέμειν αὐτοῦ τὴν ἰδέαν·
so that I trembled at the sight (form) of him;

ἀνανεύσαντος δέ, θεωρῶ
and when he nodded (or withdrew), I behold

ἐν τῷ νοΐ μου τὸ φῶς ἐν δυνάμεσιν ἀναριθμήτοις ὄν,
within my mind the light, existing in powers beyond number,

καὶ κόσμον ἀπεριόριστον γεγενημένον,
and a cosmos having come into being without limit,

καὶ περιίσχεσθαι τὸ πῦρ
and the fire being encompassed

7.5

δυνάμει μεγίστῃ,
by the greatest power,

καὶ στάσιν ἐσχηκέναι κρατούμενον·
and having attained a state of rest while being ruled;

ταῦτα δὲ ἐγὼ διενοήθην ὁρῶν
and these things I understood seeing

διὰ τὸν τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου λόγον.
through the Logos of Poimandres.

8.1

ὡς δὲ ἐν ἐκπλήξει μου ὄντος, φησὶ πάλιν ἐμοί,
And while I was still in amazement, he again said to me,

Εἶδες ἐν τῷ νῷ τὸ ἀρχέτυπον εἶδος,
“You saw in your intellect the archetypal form,

τὸ προάρχον τῆς ἀρχῆς τῆς ἀπεράντου·
the one that precedes the beginning of the boundless origin.”

ταῦτα ὁ Ποιμάνδρης ἐμοί.
These things Poimandres said to me.

— Τὰ οὖν, ἐγώ φημι, στοιχεῖα τῆς φύσεως πόθεν ὑπέστη;
— “Then,” I said, “from where did the elements of nature arise?”

8.5

— πάλιν ἐκεῖνος πρὸς ταῦτα,
— And again he replied to this,

Ἐκ βουλῆς θεοῦ,
“From the will (or counsel) of God,

ἥτις λαβοῦσα τὸν Λόγον
which, having taken hold of the Logos

καὶ ἰδοῦσα τὸν καλὸν κόσμον,
and having seen the beautiful cosmos,

ἐμιμήσατο,
imitated it,

κοσμοποιηθεῖσα διὰ τῶν ἑαυτῆς στοιχείων
being made into a cosmos through its own elements

καὶ γεννημάτων ψυχῶν.
and the begettings of souls.”


9.1

ὁ δὲ Νοῦς ὁ θεός, ἀρρενόθηλυς ὤν, ζωὴ καὶ φῶς ὑπάρχων,
And the Nous, who is God, being male-female, existing as life and light,

ἀπεκύησε λόγῳ ἕτερον Νοῦν δημιουργόν,
brought forth by means of the Logos another Nous, a demiurgic (crafting) one,

ὃς θεὸς τοῦ πυρὸς καὶ πνεύματος ὤν,
who, being god of fire and breath (spirit),

ἐδημιούργησε διοικητάς τινας ἑπτά,
fashioned certain governors, seven in number,

ἐν κύκλοις περιέχοντας τὸν αἰσθητὸν κόσμον,
who encompass the perceptible (sensible) cosmos in circles,

καὶ ἡ
and the

9.5

διοίκησις αὐτῶν εἱμαρμένη καλεῖται.
administration of these is called Fate (Heimarmenē).

10.0

ἐπήδησεν εὐθὺς ἐκ τῶν κατωφερῶν στοιχείων [τοῦ θεοῦ]
He leapt immediately from the downward-tending elements [of God]

ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ Λόγος εἰς τὸ καθαρὸν τῆς φύσεως δημιούργημα,
the Logos of God into the pure creation of Nature,

καὶ ἡνώθη τῷ δημιουργῷ Νῷ (ὁμοούσιος γὰρ ἦν),
and was united with the demiurgic Nous (for it was of the same essence),

καὶ κατελείφθη [τὰ] ἄλογα τὰ κατωφερῆ τῆς φύσεως στοιχεῖα,
and the irrational, downward-tending elements of Nature were left behind,

ὡς εἶναι ὕλην μόνην.
so as to be only matter.

11.0

ὁ δὲ δημιουργὸς Νοῦς σὺν τῷ Λόγῳ,
But the demiurgic Nous, together with the Logos,

ὁ περιίσχων τοὺς κύκλους καὶ δινῶν ῥοίζῳ,
who encompasses the circles and whirls them with a rushing motion,

ἔστρεψε τὰ ἑαυτοῦ δημιουργήματα καὶ εἴασε στρέφεσθαι
turned his own creations and allowed them to turn

ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ἀορίστου εἰς ἀπέραντον τέλος·
from an undefined beginning toward a boundless end;

ἄρχεται γάρ, οὗ λήγει·
for it begins where it ends;

ἡ δὲ τούτων περιφορά, καθὼς ἠθέλησεν ὁ Νοῦς,
and the revolution of these, as the Nous willed,

ἐκ τῶν κατωφερῶν στοιχείων ζῷα ἤνεγκεν ἄλογα
brought forth irrational living beings from the downward-tending elements

(οὐ γὰρ ἐπεῖχε τὸν Λόγον),
(for it did not contain the Logos),

ἀὴρ δὲ πετεινὰ ἤνεγκε,
and air produced flying creatures,

καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ νηκτά·
and water produced swimming creatures;

διακεχώρισται δὲ ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων ἥ τε γῆ καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ,
and earth and water were separated from one another,

καθὼς ἠθέλησεν ὁ Νοῦς,
as the Nous willed,

καὶ <ἡ γῆ> ἐξήνεγκεν ἀπ’ αὐτῆς ἃ εἶχε
and the earth brought forth from itself what it contained:

ζῷα τετράποδα <καὶ> ἑρπετά,
four-footed animals and reptiles,

θηρία ἄγρια καὶ ἥμερα.
wild beasts and tame ones.

12.0

ὁ δὲ πάντων πατὴρ ὁ Νοῦς, ὢν ζωὴ καὶ φῶς,
But the Father of all, the Nous, being life and light,

ἀπεκύησεν Ἄνθρωπον αὐτῷ ἴσον, οὗ ἠράσθη ὡς ἰδίου τόκου·
brought forth (gave birth to) a Human equal to himself, whom he loved as his own offspring;

περικαλλὴς γάρ, τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς εἰκόνα ἔχων·
for he was exceedingly beautiful, having the image of the Father;

ὄντως γὰρ καὶ ὁ θεὸς ἠράσθη τῆς ἰδίας μορφῆς,
for indeed even God fell in love with his own form,

παρέδωκε τὰ ἑαυτοῦ πάντα δημιουργήματα,
and handed over all his own created works.

13.0 

καὶ κατανοήσας δὲ τὴν τοῦ Δημιουργοῦ κτίσιν ἐν τῷ πυρί,
And having contemplated the creation of the Demiurge in the fire,

ἠβουλήθη καὶ αὐτὸς δημιουργεῖν, καὶ συνεχωρήθη ἀπὸ τοῦ πατρός·
he himself also willed to create, and permission was granted him by the Father;

γενόμενος ἐν τῇ δημιουργικῇ σφαίρᾳ, ἕξων τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν,
having come to be within the creative sphere, possessing all authority,

κατενόησε τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ τὰ δημιουργήματα,
he beheld the creations of his brother,

οἱ δὲ ἠράσθησαν αὐτοῦ, ἕκαστος δὲ μετεδίδου τῆς ἰδίας τάξεως·
and they fell in love with him, and each imparted to him something of his own rank;

καὶ καταμαθὼν τὴν τούτων οὐσίαν
and having fully learned their essence

καὶ μεταλαβὼν τῆς αὐτῶν φύσεως
and having partaken of their nature,

ἠβουλήθη ἀναρρῆξαι τὴν περιφέρειαν τῶν κύκλων,
he willed to break through the circumference of the circles,

καὶ τὸ κράτος τοῦ ἐπικειμένου ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρὸς κατανοῆσαι.
and to comprehend the power of that which is set above the fire.

14.1

καὶ ὁ τοῦ τῶν θνητῶν κόσμου καὶ τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων
And he who held authority over the world of mortals and of the irrational animals,

ἔχων πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν διὰ τῆς ἁρμονίας παρέκυψεν,
having all power through harmony, bent downward,

ἀναρρήξας τὸ κύτος,
having torn open the vault,

καὶ ἔδειξε τῇ κατωφερεῖ φύσει τὴν καλὴν
and showed to downward-tending Nature the beautiful

τοῦ θεοῦ μορφὴν, ὃν ἰδοῦσα ἀκόρεστον κάλλος <καὶ>
form of God, which, when she saw its insatiable beauty,

14.5

πᾶσαν ἐνέργειαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἔχοντα τῶν διοικητόρων τήν τε
and all the power within itself of the governors,

μορφὴν τοῦ θεοῦ ἐμειδίασεν ἔρωτι, ὡς ἅτε τῆς καλλίστης
and the form of God, she smiled in love, since it was of the most beautiful

μορφῆς· τοῦ Ἀνθρώπου τὸ εἶδος ἐν τῷ ὕδατι ἰδοῦσα καὶ τὸ
form; having seen the appearance of Man in the water and the

σκίασμα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς.
shadow upon the earth.

14.8

ὁ δὲ ἰδὼν τὴν ὁμοίαν αὐτῷ μορφὴν ἐν
And he, seeing the form like himself

αὐτῇ οὖσαν ἐν τῷ ὕδατι, ἐφίλησε καὶ ἠβουλήθη αὐτοῦ
existing in her within the water, loved her and desired

14.10

οἰκεῖν· ἅμα δὲ τῇ βουλῇ ἐγένετο ἐνέργεια,
to dwell with her; and together with the desire, the act came into being,

καὶ ᾤκησε τὴν ἄλογον μορφήν·
and he dwelt in the irrational form.

ἡ δὲ φύσις λαβοῦσα τὸν ἐρώμενον
And Nature, having taken the beloved,

περιεπλάκη ὅλη καὶ ἐμίγησαν·
was wholly entwined with him, and they were mingled.

ἐρώμενοι γὰρ ἦσαν.
For they were lovers.

15.1

καὶ διὰ τοῦτο παρὰ πάντα τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς ζῷα διπλοῦς
And for this reason, among all the living beings upon the earth, man is twofold:

ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος, θνητὸς μὲν διὰ τὸ σῶμα, ἀθάνατος δὲ
man is mortal indeed through the body, but immortal

διὰ τὸν οὐσιώδη ἄνθρωπον·
through the essential (substantial) Man.

ἀθάνατος γὰρ ὢν καὶ πάντων
For being immortal and having authority over all,

τὴν ἐξουσίαν ἔχων, τὰ θνητὰ πάσχει
he nevertheless suffers mortal things,

ὑποκείμενος τῇ εἱμαρμένῃ.
being subject to Fate.

15.5

ὑπεράνω οὖν ὢν τῆς ἁρμονίας ἐναρμόνιος γέγονε
Therefore, though being above harmony, he has become harmonized,

δοῦλος·
a slave.

ἀρρενόθηλυς δὲ ὤν, ἐξ ἀρρενοθήλεος ὢν πατρὸς
And being male-and-female, being from a male-and-female Father,

καὶ ἄϋπνος ἀπὸ ἀΰπνου ….. κρατεῖται.
and sleepless from the Sleepless One, … he is nevertheless restrained.

16.1

καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα, Νοῦς ὁ ἐμός· καὶ αὐτὸς γὰρ
And after these things (I said), “My Nous— for I too

ἐρῶ τοῦ λόγου.
will speak of the Logos / the discourse.”

ὁ δὲ Ποιμάνδρης εἶπε, Τοῦτό ἐστι τὸ
But Poimandres said, “This is the

κεκρυμμένον μυστήριον μέχρι τῆσδε τῆς ἡμέρας.
hidden mystery up to this very day.

ἡ γὰρ φύσις ἐπιμιγεῖσα τῷ Ἀνθρώπῳ ἤνεγκέ τι θαῦμα
For Nature, having mingled with Man, brought forth a certain wonder

16.5

θαυμασιώτατον·
most wondrous indeed:

ἔχοντος γὰρ αὐτοῦ τῆς ἁρμονίας τῶν ἑπτὰ τὴν
for since he possessed the nature of the harmony of the Seven—

φύσιν, οὓς ἔφην σοι ἐκ πυρὸς καὶ πνεύματος,
whom I told you are from fire and spirit—

οὐκ ἀνέμενεν ἡ φύσις,
Nature did not wait,

ἀλλ' εὐθὺς ἀπεκύησεν ἑπτὰ ἀνθρώπους, πρὸς
but immediately gave birth to seven humans, corresponding

τὰς φύσεις τῶν ἑπτὰ διοκητόρων, ἀρρενοθήλεας καὶ μεταρσίους.
to the natures of the seven governors: male-and-female and exalted.

16.10

καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα, Ὦ Ποιμάνδρη, εἰς μεγάλην γὰρ νῦν
And after this (I said), “O Poimandres, for now I have come into a great

ἐπιθυμίαν ἦλθον καὶ ποθῶ ἀκοῦσαι· μὴ ἔκτρεχε.
desire, and I long to hear—do not run ahead.”

καὶ ὁ Ποιμάνδρης εἶπεν, Ἀλλὰ σιώπα.
And Poimandres said, “But be silent.

οὔπω γάρ σοι ἀνήπλωσα τὸν πρῶτον λόγον.
For I have not yet unfolded for you the first Logos (the first discourse).”

— Ἰδοὺ σιωπῶ, ἔφην ἐγώ.
“Look—I am silent,” I said.

17.1

Ἐγένετο οὖν, ὡς ἔφην, τῶν ἑπτὰ τούτων ἡ γένεσις
Thus, as I said, the generation of these seven came to be

τοιῷδε τρόπῳ·
in the following manner:

θηλυκὴ γὰρ <γῆ> ἦν
for the earth was female,

καὶ ὕδωρ ὀχευτικόν,
and water was generative / capable of coupling,

τὸ δὲ ἐκ πυρὸς πέπειρον.
and what was from fire was mature / ripened.

ἐκ δὲ αἰθέρος τὸ πνεῦμα ἔλαβε
And from the aether it received the spirit,

καὶ ἐξήνεγκεν ἡ φύσις
and Nature brought forth

τὰ σώματα πρὸς τὸ εἶδος τοῦ
the bodies according to the form of

17.5

Ἀνθρώπου.
Man.

ὁ δὲ Ἄνθρωπος
And Man

ἐκ ζωῆς καὶ φωτὸς ἐγένετο
came to be from life and light

εἰς ψυχὴν καὶ νοῦν,
into soul and nous:

ἐκ μὲν ζωῆς ψυχήν,
from life, soul,

ἐκ δὲ φωτὸς νοῦν,
and from light, nous.

καὶ ἔμεινεν οὕτω
And thus things remained

τὰ πάντα τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ κόσμου
all things of the perceptible world

μέχρι περιόδου τέλους
until the completion of a cycle,

<καὶ> ἀρχῶν γενῶν.
and new beginnings.

18.1

ἄκουε λοιπόν, ὃν ποθεῖς λόγον ἀκοῦσαι.
Hear then the Logos which you desire to hear.

τῆς περιόδου πεπληρωμένης
When the cycle had been fulfilled,

ἐλύθη ὁ πάντων σύνδεσμος
the bond of all things was loosed

ἐκ βουλῆς θεοῦ·
by the will of God.

πάντα γὰρ ζῷα ἀρρενοθήλεα ὄντα
For all living beings, being male-and-female,

διελύετο ἅμα τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ
were dissolved together with Man,

καὶ ἐγένετο
and there came to be

τὰ μὲν ἀρρενικὰ ἐν μέρει,
some male in part,

τὰ δὲ θηλυκὰ ὁμοίως.
and others female in like manner.

18.5

ὁ δὲ θεὸς εὐθὺς εἶπεν ἁγίῳ λόγῳ,
And God immediately spoke with a holy Logos:

Αὐξάνεσθε ἐν αὐξήσει
“Grow in growth

καὶ πληθύνεσθε ἐν πλήθει
and multiply in multitude,

πάντα τὰ κτίσματα καὶ δημιουργήματα,
all creatures and created things,

καὶ ἀναγνωρισάτω <ὁ> ἔννους
and let he who having mind recognize

ἑαυτὸν ὄντα ἀθάνατον,
himself as being immortal,

καὶ τὸν αἴτιον τοῦ θανάτου ἔρωτα,
and love as the cause of death,

καὶ πάντα τὰ ὄντα.
and the (forms of) being.”

19.1

τοῦτο εἰπόντος,
When he had said this,

ἡ πρόνοια διὰ τῆς εἱμαρμένης καὶ ἁρμονίας
Providence, through Fate and Harmony,

τὰς μίξεις ἐποιήσατο,
made the mixtures,

καὶ τὰς γενέσεις κατέστησε,
and established (the process of) generation,

καὶ ἐπληθύνθη κατὰ γένος τὰ πάντα
and all things multiplied according to kind;

καὶ ὁ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτὸν
and the one who recognized himself

ἐλήλυθεν εἰς τὸ περιούσιον ἀγαθόν,
has come into the surpassing (beyond essence) Good,

19.5

ὁ δὲ ἀγαπήσας τὸ ἐκ πλάνης ἔρωτος σῶμα,
but the one who loved the body born from errant desire,

οὗτος μένει ἐν τῷ σκότει πλανώμενος,
this one remains in darkness, wandering,

αἰσθητῶς πάσχων τὰ τοῦ θανάτου.
perceptibly suffering the things of death. 

20.1

— Τί τοσοῦτον ἁμαρτάνουσιν, ἔφην ἐγώ, οἱ ἀγνοοῦντες,
— “How is it that the ignorant commit so great an error,” said I,

ἵνα στερηθῶσι τῆς ἀθανασίας;
“that they are deprived of immortality?”

— Ἔοικας, ὦ οὗτος, τούτων μὴ πεφροντικέναι ὧν ἤκουσας.
— “You seem, my friend, not to have paid attention to what you heard.”

οὐκ ἔφην σοι νοεῖν;
“Did I not tell you to understand?”

— Νοῶ καὶ μιμνήσκομαι, εὐχαριστῶ δὲ ἅμα.
— “I understand and I remember—and I’m grateful at the same time.”

— Εἰ ἐνόησας, εἰπέ μοι, διὰ τί ἄξιοί εἰσι τοῦ θανάτου οἱ ἐν τῷ θανάτῳ ὄντες;
— “If you understood, tell me: why are they worthy of death, those being in death (state of mortality) 

— Ὅτι προκατάρχεται τοῦ οἰκείου σώματος τὸ στυγνὸν σκότος,
— “Because the hateful darkness takes the lead in (i.e., comes first over) their own body,

ἐξ οὗ ἡ ὑγρὰ φύσις, ἐξ ἧς τὸ σῶμα συνέστηκεν ἐν τῷ αἰσθητῷ κόσμῳ,
from which comes the moist nature—from which the body has been constituted in the perceptible world—

ἐξ οὗ θάνατος ἀρδεύεται.
from which death is drawn (as if watered/supplied).”

21.1

— Ἐνόησας ὀρθῶς, ὦ οὗτος.
— “You have understood correctly, my friend.”

κατὰ τί δὲ «ὁ νοήσας ἑαυτὸν εἰς αὐτὸν χωρεῖ», ὅπερ ἔχει ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος;
“But according to what (in what sense) is it that ‘the one who has understood himself enters into himself,’ as the Logos of God has it?”

— φημὶ ἐγώ, Ὅτι ἐκ φωτὸς καὶ ζωῆς συνέστηκεν ὁ πατὴρ τῶν ὅλων,
— “I say: because from light and life the Father of all has been constituted,”

ἐξ οὗ γέγονεν ὁ Ἄνθρωπος.
“from which (whom) the Human has come to be.”

— Εὖ φῂς λαλῶν·
— “You speak well.”

φῶς καὶ ζωή ἐστιν ὁ θεὸς καὶ πατήρ, ἐξ οὗ ἐγένετο ὁ Ἄνθρωπος.
“Light and life is God and Father, from whom the Human came into being.”

ἐὰν οὖν μάθῃς αὐτὸν ἐκ ζωῆς καὶ φωτὸς ὄντα
“If, then, you learn/realize that he is being from life and light,”

καὶ ὅτι ἐκ τούτων τυγχάνεις,
“and that you too happen to be from these (i.e., derive from them),”

εἰς ζωὴν πάλιν χωρήσεις.
“you will enter into life again.”

ταῦτα ὁ Ποιμάνδρης εἶπεν.
“These things Poimandres said.”

– Ἀλλ' ἔτι μοι εἰπέ, πῶς εἰς ζωὴν χωρήσω ἐγώ, ἔφην, ὦ Νοῦς ἐμός;
— “But still tell me: how shall I enter into life, I (myself)?” I said. “O my Mind,”

φησὶ γὰρ ὁ θεός·
“for God says:”

»ὁ ἔννους ἄνθρωπος ἀναγνωρισάτω ἑαυτόν»
“‘Let the human-with-mind recognize himself.’”

22.1 

οὐ πάντες γὰρ ἄνθρωποι νοῦν ἔχουσιν;
“For do not all humans possess mind?”

— Εὐφήμει, ὦ οὗτος, λαλῶν·
— “You speak well, my friend.”

παραγίνομαι αὐτὸς ἐγὼ ὁ Νοῦς τοῖς ὁσίοις καὶ ἀγαθοῖς
“I came into being, myself—I, the Nous, with the holy and the good”

καὶ καθαροῖς καὶ ἐλεήμοσι, τοῖς εὐσεβοῦσι,
“and the pure and the compassionate, those who are pious,”

καὶ ἡ παρουσία μου γίνεται βοήθεια,
“and my presence becomes a help,”

καὶ εὐθὺς τὰ πάντα γνωρίζουσι
“and immediately they come to know all things”

καὶ τὸν πατέρα ἱλάσκονται ἀγαπητικῶς
“and they appease the Father lovingly”

καὶ εὐχαριστοῦσιν εὐλογοῦντες καὶ ὑμνοῦντες
“and they give thanks, blessing and hymning,”

τεταγμένως πρὸς αὐτὸν τῇ στοργῇ,
“in an ordered manner toward him, with devotion,”

καὶ πρὸ τοῦ παραδοῦναι τὸ σῶμα ἰδίῳ θανάτῳ
“and before handing over the body to its own death,”

μυσάττονται τὰς αἰσθήσεις,
“they defile (i.e. reject / shrink from) the senses,”

εἰδότες αὐτῶν τὰ ἐνεργήματα·
“knowing their operations (what they do).”

μᾶλλον δὲ οὐκ ἐάσω αὐτὸς ὁ Νοῦς
“But rather, I myself, the Nous, will not permit”

τὰ προσπίπτοντα ἐνεργήματα τοῦ σώματος ἐκτελεσθῆναι.
“the intrusive operations of the body to be carried out.”

πυλωρὸς ὢν ἀποκλείσω τὰς εἰσόδους
“Being a gatekeeper, I will shut off the entrances”

τῶν κακῶν καὶ αἰσχρῶν ἐνεργημάτων,
“of evil and shameful operations,”

τὰς ἐνθυμήσεις ἐκκόπτων.
“cutting off the impulses/thoughts.”

23.1 

τοῖς δὲ ἀνοήτοις καὶ κακοῖς
“But from the mindless and the bad”

καὶ πονηροῖς καὶ φθονεροῖς καὶ πλεονέκταις καὶ φονεῦσι
“and the wicked and the envious and the greedy and the murderers”

καὶ ἀσεβέσι πόρρωθέν εἰμι,
“and the impious, I am far away,”

τῷ τιμωρῷ ἐκχωρήσας δαίμονι,
“having yielded them over to the avenging daimōn,”

ὅστις τὴν ὀξύτητα τοῦ πυρὸς προσβάλλων
“who, the sharpness of fire, striking”

† θρώσκει αὐτὸν † αἰσθητικῶς
“† leaps / rushes him † in a sensory (perceptible) way,”
(† wording uncertain in the manuscripts; sense: violent sensory assault)

καὶ μᾶλλον ἐπὶ τὰς ἀνομίας αὐτὸν ὁπλίζει,
“and rather, toward the lawless it equips him”

ἵνα τύχῃ πλείονος τιμωρίας,
“so that he may incur greater punishment,”

καὶ οὐ παύεται ἐπ' ὀρέξεις ἀπλέτους τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ἔχων,
“and he does not cease, towards cravings unlimited, the desire having,”

ἀκορέστως σκοτομαχῶν,
“without satiety, fighting in darkness,”

καὶ † τοῦτον † βασανίζει,
“and † torments him †,”
(† pronoun/reference textually uncertain, but sense is clear)

καὶ ἐπ' αὐτὸν πῦρ ἐπὶ τὸ πλεῖον αὐξάνει.
“and the fire upon him increases ever greater.”

24.1

– Εὖ μοι πάντα, ὡς ἐβουλόμην, ἐδίδαξας, ὦ Νοῦς,
– Well to me all, just as I wished, you taught, O Mind,

ἔτι δέ μοι εἰπὲ <περὶ> τῆς ἀνόδου τῆς γινομένης.
but tell me about the ascent, the happening one.

– πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ Ποιμάνδρης εἷπε,
To this Poimandres said:

Πρῶτον μὲν ἐν τῇ ἀναλύσει τοῦ σώματος τοῦ ὑλικοῦ
First of all, in the dissolution of the material body,

παραδίδως αὐτὸ τὸ σῶμα εἰς ἀλλοίωσιν,
you hand over the body itself to change,

24.5

καὶ τὸ εἶδος ὃ εἶχες ἀφανὲς γίνεται,
and the form you had becomes unseen,

καὶ τὸ ἦθος τῷ δαίμονι ἀνενέργητον παραδίδως,
and the ethos (character), to the daimon, inoperative, you hand over, 

καὶ αἱ αἰσθήσεις τοῦ σώματος
and the sensations of the body

εἰς τὰς ἑαυτῶν πηγὰς ἐπανέρχονται,
into their own sources they return,

μέρη γινόμεναι καὶ πάλιν συνανιστάμεναι εἰς τὰς ἐνεργείας.
becoming parts, and again they arise together into their functions.

καὶ ὁ θυμὸς καὶ ἡ ἐπιθυμία εἰς τὴν ἄλογον φύσιν χωρεῖ.
And the spirit/heart (thymos) and desire into the irrational nature it passes. (it refers to both thymos and desire as one unit) 

25.1

καὶ οὕτως ὁρμᾷ λοιπὸν ἄνω διὰ τῆς ἁρμονίας,
And thus it rushes now upward through the Harmony,

καὶ τῇ πρώτῃ ζώνῃ δίδωσι τὴν αὐξητικὴν ἐνέργειαν καὶ τὴν μειωτικήν,
and to the first zone it gives the power of increase and of decrease,

καὶ τῇ δευτέρᾳ τὴν μηχανὴν τῶν κακῶν, δόλον ἀνενέργητον,
and to the second, the contrivance of evils, deceit made inactive,

καὶ τῇ τρίτῃ τὴν ἐπιθυμητικὴν ἀπάτην ἀνενέργητον,
and to the third, desire’s deception made inactive,

καὶ τῇ τετάρτῃ τὴν ἀρχοντικὴν προφανίαν ἀπλεονέκτητον,
and to the fourth, the ruling manifestation made free of greed,

καὶ τῇ πέμπτῃ τὸ θράσος τὸ ἀνόσιον καὶ τῆς τόλμης τὴν προπέτειαν,
and to the fifth, audacity's unholyless  and the rashness/boldness's recklessness,

καὶ τῇ ἕκτῃ τὰς ἀφορμὰς τὰς κακὰς τοῦ πλούτου ἀνενεργήτους,
and to the sixth, the evil impulses of wealth made inactive,

καὶ τῇ ἑβδόμῃ ζώνῃ τὸ ἐνεδρεῦον ψεῦδος.
and to the seventh zone, the ambushing lie.

26.1

καὶ τότε γυμνωθεὶς ἀπὸ τῶν τῆς ἁρμονίας ἐνεργημάτων
And then, having been stripped from the operations/energies of the Harmony,

γίνεται ἐπὶ τὴν ὀγδοατικὴν φύσιν, τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν ἔχων,
he comes to the Ogdoadic nature (the Eighth), possessing his own proper power,

καὶ ὑμνεῖ σὺν τοῖς οὖσι τὸν πατέρα·
and he hymns, with the beings that are, the Father.

συγχαίρουσι δὲ οἱ παρόντες τῇ τούτου παρουσίᾳ,
And they rejoice together, those present, in his presence,

καὶ ὁμοιωθεὶς τοῖς συνοῦσιν ἀκούει
and having been made like those with him, he hears

26.5

καί τινων δυνάμεων ὑπὲρ τὴν ὀγδοατικὴν φύσιν
also certain Powers beyond the Ogdoadic nature

φωνῇ τινι ἡδείᾳ ὑμνουσῶν τὸν θεόν·
hymning God with a certain sweet voice.

καὶ τότε τάξει ἀνέρχονται πρὸς τὸν πατέρα,
And then, in order/rank, they ascend to the Father,

καὶ αὐτοὶ εἰς δυνάμεις ἑαυτοὺς παραδιδόασι,
and they themselves hand themselves over into Powers,

καὶ δυνάμεις γενόμενοι ἐν θεῷ γίνονται.
and having become Powers, they come to be in God.

τοῦτό ἐστι τὸ ἀγαθὸν τέλος τοῖς γνῶσιν ἐσχηκόσι,
This is the good end for those who have attained gnosis:

θεωθῆναι.
to be deified / to become divine.

λοιπόν, τί μέλλεις;
So then—what do you intend?

οὐχ ὡς πάντα παραλαβὼν καθοδηγὸς γίνῃ τοῖς ἀξίοις,
Will you not, after receiving everything, become a guide for the worthy,

ὅπως τὸ γένος τῆς ἀνθρωπότητος διὰ σοῦ ὑπὸ θεοῦ σωθῇ;
so that the race of humankind may be saved by God through you?

27.1

ταῦτα εἰπὼν ὁ Ποιμάνδρης ἐμοὶ ἐμίγη ταῖς δυνάμεσιν.
Having said these things to me, Poimandres was mingled with the Powers (and departed).

ἐγὼ δὲ εὐχαριστήσας καὶ εὐλογήσας τὸν πατέρα τῶν ὅλων
And I, having given thanks and blessed the Father of all,

ἀνείθην ὑπ' αὐτοῦ δυναμωθεὶς καὶ διδαχθεὶς τοῦ παντὸς τὴν φύσιν καὶ τὴν μεγίστην θέαν,
was released by him, having been strengthened and been taught the nature of the All and the greatest vision,

καὶ ἦργμαι κηρύσσειν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις τὸ τῆς εὐσεβείας καὶ γνώσεως κάλλος,
and I began to proclaim to human beings the beauty of piety and of knowledge (gnosis):

Ὦ λαοί, ἄνδρες γηγενεῖς,
O peoples, earth-born men,

οἱ μέθῃ καὶ ὕπνῳ ἑαυτοὺς ἐκδεδωκότες καὶ τῇ ἀγνωσίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ,
you who have handed yourselves over to drunkenness and sleep, and to ignorance of God,

νήψατε,
sober up, 

παύσασθε δὲ κραιπαλῶντες,
stop your hangover, 

θελγόμενοι ὕπνῳ ἀλόγῳ.
being bewitched by irrational sleep.

28.1

Οἱ δὲ ἀκούσαντες παρεγένοντο ὁμοθυμαδόν.
And those who heard came together as one.

ἐγὼ δέ φημι,
And I said:

Τί ἑαυτούς, ὦ ἄνδρες γηγενεῖς, εἰς θάνατον ἐκδεδώκατε,
“Why have you, O earth-born men, into death handed yourselves over, 

ἔχοντες ἐξουσίαν τῆς ἀθανασίας μεταλαβεῖν;
having the power of immortality to partake?

μετανοήσατε,
Repent / change your mind,

οἱ συνοδεύσαντες τῇ πλάνῃ καὶ συγκοινωνήσαντες τῇ ἀγνοίᾳ·
you who have accompanied error and had in common together the ignorance.

ἀπαλλάγητε τοῦ σκοτεινοῦ φωτός,
Be set free from the dark light,

μεταλάβετε τῆς ἀθανασίας,
partake of immortality,

καταλείψαντες τὴν φθοράν.
having abandoned corruption/decay.”
 
29.1

καὶ οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν καταφλυαρήσαντες ἀπέστησαν,
And some of them, having babbled nonsense / talked foolishly, withdrew,

τῇ τοῦ θανάτου ὁδῷ ἑαυτοὺς ἐκδεδωκότες,
the road/path of death, having handed themselves over to;

οἱ δὲ παρεκάλουν διδαχθῆναι,
but others were requesting to be taught,

ἑαυτοὺς πρὸ ποδῶν μου ῥίψαντες.
having thrown themselves down before my feet.

ἐγὼ δὲ ἀναστήσας αὐτοὺς
And I, having raised them up,

καθοδηγὸς ἐγενόμην τοῦ γένους,
became a guide of the race (of humankind),

τοὺς λόγους διδάσκων,
teaching the Logos, 

πῶς καὶ τίνι τρόπῳ σωθήσονται,
how and with what way they will be saved,

καὶ ἔσπειρα αὐτοῖς τοὺς τῆς σοφίας λόγους
and I sowed among them the words of wisdom,

καὶ ἐτράφησαν ἐκ τοῦ ἀμβροσίου ὕδατος.
and they were nourished from the ambrosial water.

ὀψίας δὲ γενομένης
and evening having come,

καὶ τῆς τοῦ ἡλίου αὐγῆς ἀρχομένης δύεσθαι ὅλης,
and the sun’s radiance began to sink completely,

ἐκέλευσα αὐτοῖς εὐχαριστεῖν τῷ θεῷ,
I instructed them to give thanks to God,

καὶ ἀναπληρώσαντες τὴν εὐχαριστίαν
and after completing the thanksgiving,

ἕκαστος ἐτράπη εἰς τὴν ἰδίαν κοίτην.
each one turned to his own bed.

30.1

ἐγὼ δὲ τὴν εὐεργεσίαν τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου ἀνεγραψάμην εἰς ἐμαυτόν
I took the benefaction of Poimandres and wrote it into my being

καὶ πληρωθεὶς ὧν ἤθελον ἐξηυφράνθην
and having been filled of that which I desired I was brought into joy

ἐγένετο γὰρ ὁ τοῦ σώματος ὕπνος τῆς ψυχῆς νῆψις
For it came to be that the body’s sleep: the soul’s waking

καὶ ἡ κάμμυσις τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν ἀληθινὴ ὅρασις.
and the closing of the eyes: true sight.

καὶ ἡ σιωπή μου ἐγκύμων τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ,
and my silence: pregnant with the Good,

30.5

καὶ ἡ τοῦ λόγου ἐκφορὰ γεννήματα ἀγαθῶν.
and the bringing-forth of the Logos generates Good.

τοῦτο δὲ συνέβη μοι λαβόντι ἀπὸ τοῦ νοός μου,
And this happened to me, having received (it) from my Nous,

τουτέστι τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου, τοῦ τῆς αὐθεντίας λόγου.
that is, from Poimandres, the Logos of authority. 

θεόπνους γενόμενος τῆς ἀληθείας ἦλθον.
Having become God-breathed from truth, I came. 

διὸ δίδωμι ἐκ ψυχῆς καὶ ἰσχύος ὅλης εὐλογίαν τῷ πατρὶ θεῷ.
Therefore I give, from soul and from all strength, a blessing to God the Father.

31.1

ἅγιος ὁ θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ τῶν ὅλων.
Holy is God and father of all. 

ἅγιος ὁ θεὸς, οὗ ἡ βουλὴ τελεῖται ἀπὸ τῶν ἰδίων δυνάμεων.
holy is God, from whom/which the will comes to completion from his own powers. 

ἅγιος ὁ θεός, ὃς γνωσθῆναι βούλεται καὶ γινώσκεται τοῖς ἰδίοις.
holy is God, who wills to be known and is known to his own. 

ἅγιος εἶ, ὁ λόγῳ συστησάμενος τὰ ὄντα.
holy are you, systematizing by Logos the beings. 

ἅγιος εἶ, οὗ πᾶσα φύσις εἰκὼν ἔφυ.
holy are you, from whom/which all nature as an image/manifestation has grown. 

ἅγιος εἶ, ὃν ἡ φύσις οὐκ ἐμόρφωσεν.
holy are you, whom nature did not form. 

ἅγιος εἶ, ὁ πάσης δυνάμεως ἰσχυρότερος.
holy are you, the stronger of all powers. 

ἅγιος εἶ, ὁ πάσης ὑπεροχῆς μείζων.
holy are you, the greater of every superiority

ἅγιος εἶ, ὁ κρείττων τῶν ἐπαίνων.
holy are you, greater of (beyond) praise

δέξαι λογικὰς θυσίας ἁγνάς.
Receive rational sacrifices, pure,

ἀπὸ ψυχῆς καὶ καρδίας
from soul and heart,

πρὸς σὲ ἀνατεταμένης,
stretched out toward you,

ἀνεκλάλητε, ἄρρητε,
O ineffable one, unspeakable one,

σιωπῇ φωνούμενε.
being voiced through silence.

32.1

αἰτουμένῳ τὸ μὴ σφαλῆναι τῆς γνώσεως τῆς κατ’ οὐσίαν ἡμῶν
To the asker asking not to fall away from the knowledge of which accords of our essence,

ἐπίνευσόν μοι καὶ ἐνδυνάμωσόν με,
grant assent to me and strengthen me,

καὶ τῆς χάριτος ταύτης φωτίσω τοὺς ἐν ἀγνοίᾳ τοῦ γένους,
and by means of this grace I shall enlighten those of the race who are in ignorance, 

μοῦ ἀδελφούς, υἱοὺς δὲ σοῦ.
my brothers, yet your sons.

32.5

διὸ πιστεύω καὶ μαρτυρῶ·
Therefore I believe and I bear witness;

εἰς ζωὴν καὶ φῶς χωρῶ.
into life and light I go.

εὐλογητὸς εἶ, πάτερ.
Blessed are you, Father.

ὁ σὸς ἄνθρωπος συναγιάζειν σοι βούλεται,
Your human being wills to be made holy together with you,

καθὼς παρέδωκας αὐτῷ τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν.
just as you handed over to him all authority.


